---
layout: post
title: Classification Project
---
Summary of Classification Project

For my latest machine learning project, I used several models from the scikitlearn import package to classify the profit status  (non-profit or for-profit) of various institutions of higher education based on numerous explanatory variables. I used a large dataset of colleges provided by the US Department of Education and my first task was to determine which explanatory variables affected the profit status the most. Using the SelectKBest operation, I found that the most impactful explanatory variable was whether the students repaid their loans within 7 years of graduation or not. Intuitively, I saw that both accreditation and online only status  significantly affected the profit status (because only non-profit schools are accredited and because many of the most popular for-profit colleges are online only). Out of all of the classification models that I tested, I found that the gradient boosting classier had the best AUC on the ROC plot and also had the highest true positive rate.

Worst Schools:

1. Strayer University (Cobb Campus) (Very Worst)
2. Miller-Motte College (Raleigh)
3. Nebraska Indian Community College
4. University of Science and Arts of Oklahoma
5. Ivy Tech Community College (South Central)

To determine which schools in the entire database are the very worst, I designed a ranking system which accounts for the retention, loan principal, and percentage of students who repaid loans within 7 years of graduation. In my ranking system, I applied Standard Scaler to standardize each category to a z-score, initially giving each factor an equal importance. However, I gave retention the largest multiplication factor (and thus the most importance in the ranking) because I believe it is the best metric of how good a school is. Nobody is going to know how good a school is better than the actual students are. So, in my ranking system, a very low rate of retention gets severely punished because it is a demonstration that a low percentage of students are actually happy at the school. In my ranking system, the next most important and heavily-weighted factor was the percentage of students who paid off their loans within 7 years of graduation. I used this metric because many of the students deciding to attend these colleges are really doing so to increase their income in the long run. Inability to repay their loans within 7 years of graduation, to me, shows that them attending the college did not really affect their lives in the ways that they realistically wanted it to. Additionally, I think that leaving students with crippling long-term debt should be another qualifier for being a bad college. I also considered the actual loan principal just to account for the actual amount of money students have take out a loan for. Interestingly, 4 out of the 5 of these schools did not exhibit the lowest retention rates of the entire dataset.

If I were overseeing accreditation, the factors that I would most heavily consider when determining if a college is predatory or non-predatory would be the ratio of the tuition revenue to the total amount spent on students. A school which only spends a fraction of what their students gives them is far more likely to not be upholding its promises to its students. Although this ratio does not automatically determine the predatory status, I believe that any school scoring above a particular threshold should automatically qualify for an audit of the schools financial activity and further examination into the services provided by the students. Moreover, according to the NY Times [here](https://www.nytimes.com/2014/04/17/opinion/reining-in-predatory-schools.html?nytmobile=0), almost all cases of predatory schools are with for-profit institutions. Thus, I think that all for-profit schools should automatically be required to have a government examination into their activity. I would also look into the students’ employment in the fields in which they studied because many predatory schools charge their students for a bunch of useless credentials before dumping them off, not having added any value to them as workers.

You can find my code [here](https://github.com/jonahsong/Classification_Project)